[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Perhaps no word
strikes more fear into a
person than the word cancer.
It's understandable when you
consider that its origins have
largely remained a
mystery and no two cancers
seem to respond predictably
to the same common therapies
available.
But that story may be changing.
Travis Christofferson's book,
"Tripping Over the Truth,"
lays out a very clear history of
cancer research and the return
of the theory that was buried
under the rush to radiate
and poison first and
ask questions later.
The travesty of the cancer
game is the toxicity
so many people
have been through.
And if reading your book is
an indication, some of this
could have been avoided.
Almost all of it could
have been avoided,
had some of the
truth been embraced
a long time ago in the
research through the years.
And first of all, I want to
find out how you ended up
writing this superb book.
How did you end up
down this rabbit hole?
>>TRAVIS CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
For me, it was really a
collision of I guess probably
obsessive curiosity.
And I was in grad school and I
was working on a cancer theory
class.
And prior to that I'd
been taught like everybody
about the somatic
mutation theory of cancer,
the prevailing theory at
the time, which is cancer
is caused by a sequential
series of mutations.
And I stumbled onto this book
called "Cancer is a Metabolic
Disease" by Tom Seyfried.
And I looked through it and was
just floored by the content.
It was just this remarkable
book with this just plethora
of evidence backing this sort
of nontraditional alternative
theory of cancer that
its origin is metabolic.
So I was so taken aback by
it I flew out and saw Tom
and had compiled a
list of questions.
And we sat and talked
for about six hours.
And I came back and really
dove into the material
because it was so intriguing.
And then around that
same time, a book
called "The Emperor of All
Maladies" had come out,
a Pulitzer Prize winning
New York Times bestseller.
>>REGINA: What's it called,
"The Emperor of All Maladies?"
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
I think it came out in 2012.
And really it was the first
comprehensive history of cancer
that-- this hadn't
been written before,
this sweeping history of
our tenure with cancer,
starting from the
very beginning.
And so it was told from
a gene centric view that
sort of marched through the
history and got to where we are
today with the somatic
mutation theory.
And so the challenge to me was
this was such a beautiful story
that goes way back
to a guy named
Otto Warburg, who first proposed
this theory in the '20s.
And then it was
brush under the table
while the somatic
mutation theory took hold
and now it's made
this resurgence.
And so the challenge to
me was to write the story
from a historical context
because I think it was
a story that need to be told.
>>REGINA: I think so.
And I think it's important
for naysayers, people
who are-- maybe justifiably
so-- living in such fear
that you have to
look toward anyone
that appears to be in authority,
which often means a white coat.
And so if you're looking
there and say if you really
want to start expanding
your research,
maybe someone in your family has
cancer, you just need to know.
I like the fact
that you have laid
the historical perspective.
And as you say,
you're not the first
but you've done it
in a beautiful way.
The historical
perspective-- and we
have a mutual
friend named Sandy,
who turned me on to your
work, said, oh, Regina, you're
going to love it.
It reads like a thriller.
It's a page turner
on cancer, really?
But that is an ode to
your writing style,
which is really quite nice.
But the thing is
once you understand
how we came about
these belief systems
and what the evidence
in the day for it
was, it makes some sense of why
they went certain directions.
So I thought we might
begin more or less
at the beginning, the beginning
of your story in the 1700s
with Percival Potts in London.
And we're going to take
people through the book.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Sure.
So yeah, everything we know
about cancer, the history to me
is remarkable because
it's not a linear line.
There's just these punctuations
where we skip from one thing
to the next.
And when you look
back in retrospect,
you see where we
have made mistakes.
And if you could go back
to the days of the Greeks,
we'd be talking right
now that cancer for sure
was caused by an
abundance of black bile
and we'd be dead sure
that was the cause.
But now we know, of
course, that seems silly.
So yeah, the very beginning
one of the first sort
of landmark
understanding of cancer
was a surgeon
named Percival Pott
in London, who noticed that this
condition that affected what
was the chimney sweeps at
the time, these children,
these boys that
climbed into chimneys
and swept out the ash during
the Industrial Revolution.
It was a horrible job,
probably the worst job anybody
could have.
>>REGINA: And it's very sad
reading about it in your book,
how these kids lived.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
It was a horrific time and
they were indentured servants.
I think the infant
mortality rate was 50%.
Longevity, disease-- almost
everybody had tuberculosis.
>>REGINA: And these little
kids are seven, eight, nine,
10 years old.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And so they would climb up in
the chimneys and sweep them out
and they started getting
this like scrotal warts
and nobody knew what they were.
>>REGINA: Because
they didn't bathe,
they didn't have
access to bathing.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And so they chalked them up
to a syphilis-like thing.
Well, Pott noticed
there's no way
that a venereal disease would
distribute itself evenly
across this group of occupation.
>>REGINA: Well, and
seven-year-olds.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
>>REGINA: They didn't
mention that part.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Like
a contagious virus thing
that can spread.
So he assigned it to
the first carcinogen.
It was the first documented
case that the ash
could be a carcinogen and
cause and neoplastic growth
of cancer.
And so that was really an
amazing leap intellectually
because now we tied cancer
to the external environment.
Lurking around us
were these agents
that could possibly come in and
cause this neoplastic growth.
And we knew from
another German scientist
that cancer was just
pathological cell
growth at that time.
It was growth out of control.
So this was the
first moment that it
was tied to the environment.
And now I think
we're at, if you look
at the NCI's website, 300
or 400 known carcinogens
in our environment.
So they're lurking
around us everywhere.
>>REGINA: All right.
Let's just back up a tad.
I said I wanted to dive
into the historical part,
but first let's lay a
little more foundation then
we're going to move back
into the history of it.
And you mentioned earlier
the somatic mutation theory.
Explain what that is for
everybody so they understand
the model we're stuck in.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Sure.
So the schematic mutation theory
is still the prevailing theory,
it's still overwhelming
consensus theory.
And what it states
is that cancer
is caused by a progressive
series of mutations
to key oncogenes.
And so the genes that control
the cell cycle, right,
tumor suppressor genes or
driver genes, a certain series
will come in and sort of
rewire the cellular circuitry
towards uncontrolled
growth, the six hallmark
features of cancer.
So it states that cancer is
driven by physical mutations
to DNA.
That's the prevailing theory.
>>REGINA: And that has
been for how long now?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: The somatic
mutation theory really
got locked down by a series
of experiments in 1976.
>>REGINA: OK.
So 40 years.
And that's also when our modes
and modalities of healing
occurred, too, roughly--
the rise of chemotherapy
and radiation and so forth.
But we're going to get
into the history of chemo.
That was fascinating, too.
OK.
So going forward
just a little bit,
you say that this particular
model of understanding
and the various therapies
we have available
is really more centered
on shrinking tumors,
not necessarily on
ridding the body
of the source of the disease.
And that's really kind
of been the fatal flaw
in cancer therapy, right?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
That really came
around-- the FDA,
I think, got into-- during
the Clinton administration,
they were accused
of not doing enough.
So instead of saying, we need
to prolong survival, the FDA
kind of ratcheted back the
necessary markers for drug
approval and said you
just need tumor shrinkage.
And so now, of course,
they're criticized
that that was
probably not the best
way to go because now we
get drugs that shrink tumors
but don't confer any survival
and come at terrible costs
financially and
side effects wise.
So you feel for their position
originally why they did it,
but it's sort of come full
circle that it's probably
not the way to go.
But the original
chemotherapies that
came about, they
came during a time
when the understanding of
cancer was what's called
the single cell hypothesis.
And what that was
is the idea was
that we had to kill a cancer
down to the last single cell,
and if you didn't get
that last single cell then
it would probably reignite and
you'd have recurrence and be
back where you started from.
So under that
paradigm of thought,
that's when the NCI really
pushed chemotherapy hard
in the '70s and it was a
much more liberal time.
I mean the FDA was not-- they
just allowed these guys kind of
to go for it.
And so again, they did
fell a handful of cancers--
testicular, some childhood
leukemias, Hodgkin's disease--
but they pushed and pushed and
pushed chemotherapy as hard
as they could because of
this single cell hypothesis.
And then in the late '70s,
early '80s, they went too far
and they tried to attack the
hard cancers like lung, breast,
and so forth.
And we're almost killing
the patients and not--
>>REGINA: By using
carpet bombing the body.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And doing all that
and not getting
any really meaningful
increase in survival.
So then they had to step back
and rethink how they did.
>>REGINA: And I think it said
in the beginning of your book
that the survival
rates of cancer today
are very similar to what
they were in the 1950s.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Right.
>>REGINA: Before all of this.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
Yeah.
That's the biggest statistic
that's seared in my mind.
The statistics are
everywhere-- one
in three women will be
diagnosed, one in two men.
I think over 600,000
Americans will die this year.
But the biggest one
is the death rate
has not changed much since 1950.
>>REGINA: In spite
of all of this.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: In
spite of all this.
And so that's why my book,
sort of the underlying theme
was, OK, we're guided by
what we know of cancer.
The therapies we're
developing are guided
by how we perceive the disease.
And so as we perceive
the diseases,
the cause from
mutations, we transition
to the era of targeted
medicine in the '80s.
And so we've tried to target
these mutational derivatives
of oncogenes and
really, really, it's
been a terrible outcome--
very, very little success.
And this is not beyond my book,
this is coming from everybody.
We need to rethink
targeted therapies.
They may have a place in
some certain scenarios,
but this idea of a single
agent therapy to cure cancer
is scrapped.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
It doesn't yet
doesn't make any sense
once your book starts
revealing the nature
of the metabolic
cause for cancer.
So now let's continue on and
I'm going to toss names out
and you can tell us
their contribution,
because I'm going
somewhat sequentially--
although in the book, like you
say, this isn't a linear story.
So we're now down to
David Paul Huntsman,
and he was using dyes
to color the cells.
And what was the discovery--
and give us the time frame
and what came out
of that discovery.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: OK.
You have David-- that was
I want to say late 1800s.
And a guy named Fleming had
developed a blue dye that
would stain DNA.
And you can see these leaps
in our understanding of cancer
come lockstep with technology.
So all of a sudden, we could
visualize he called them
chromosomes for colored bodies.
And we could visualize
chromosomes, and so
David Paul--
>>REGINA: Because
of the microscopy?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
>>REGINA: Yeah, advances.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
He'd stain them and then
look under a microscope
and see the DNA.
And he was the first one to
apply this dye to cancer cells.
And what he noticed
was they were
a mess-- they were disjointed,
broken, recombined, duplicated.
And so born from that was
this theory that, well, OK,
maybe cancer is a product
of chromosomal dysfunction,
of breakage, of
chromosomal chaos.
And that was really
the first step
towards the somatic
mutation theory.
>>REGINA: OK.
From there it was a chicken that
revealed a viral connection.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
So this is non-linear.
>>REGINA: Chicken tumors.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
>>REGINA: We said this isn't yet
here because these things were
kind of happening all over.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
So that was Peyton Rouse,
an American scientist.
Yeah.
So hop across an
ocean and Peyton Rous,
a wonderful American
scientist, found chickens that
had a viral cause of cancer.
He could take some
exudate from the tumors
and transfer it to
another chicken.
So this was the first known
viral cause of cancer.
And all of a sudden, the
New York Times headlines is,
is cancer an infectious disease?
Because it went against
everything we knew at the time.
And so that spawned the viral
theory of cancer, which really
held on until 1976, when
a series of experiments--
ironically proven with
the Rous sarcoma virus--
they proved the somatic
mutation theory of cancer.
But yeah, his viral theory was
always sort of floating around,
never could be proven,
never could be disproven.
The government
undertook huge efforts
to find viruses in humans and
found I think only one or two.
And so it never disappeared,
but it was never proven.
And then finally, it was
disproven all at once.
>>REGINA: And at what
point did the Human Genome
Project come into all of this to
start tracking this thing down?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
So once the somatic mutation
theory was locked down,
a clear goal from
that point on was
to find all the mutations
that caused cancer.
And once sequencing technology
advanced to the point
where we could sequence DNA
very cheaply and efficiently,
a project was proposed
called the Cancer Genome
Atlas to sequence all
the DNA in cancer cells.
And the Human Genome
Project you've probably
heard of to sequence just
our DNA yet of humans, this
was 10,000 times that effort
to sequence that many genomes.
And that began in
2006, and that's really
where the confusion
began because when
you dive into the data that
came out of that, what was seen
was not what was expected.
Back when the somatic mutation
theory became entrenched,
the idea was that it was a
sequential series of mutations
that would sort of
define each cancer.
And when they'd
sequence genomes,
they didn't find
that exact series.
What struck everybody was
this degree of heterogeneity.
So if you sequence tumors
from different people,
there's just a huge
degree of randomness
from one patient to the next.
So it's very difficult to
assign cause and effect,
and this caught everybody
off guard, the guys
at the very top of the
sequencing effort and so forth.
And so that's when Tom Seyfried
and all these other scientists
sort of stepped in, entered
this cloud of chaos,
and espoused these
alternative theories.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's go back to Otto Warburg
and his life and his work
and what he brought forth
and what kind of resistance
came at that time and how
he went about his discovery.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
OK.
So at that time,
this was the 1920s,
and so the viral theory
was still floating around,
Hansmann's chaotic chromosomes.
Nobody knew quite
what cancer was.
And so Otto Warburg was a
brilliant German scientist,
Nobel Prize winner.
He was nominated
for the Nobel Prize
on three separate occasions.
But he always wanted cancer
to be as hallmark discovery.
And so when he finally turned
his attention to cancer,
he noticed a
striking abnormality
that cancer cells are
overproducing lactic acid
in the presence of oxygen and
there's no reason that cells
should be doing that.
Normal cells almost
never do that.
And the question is,
why are they doing that?
And so he later on in his
career, about the '50s,
decided that the
reason is because
the respiratory apparatus
of the cell is damaged,
and today we know
that's the mitochondria.
And so his theory
was there's damage
to the cell's ability
to generate energy
with oxygen aerobically.
The cell then transitions to
anaerobic energy generation
and that is the prime
cause of cancer.
>>REGINA: And that's a
buildup of lactic acid?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
That's the side effect of
that mode of energy generation
is lactic acid.
>>REGINA: And so what did he do
in terms of any kind of trials
of the day and such?
Was he was able
to prove this out
in any way in working
with his patients,
or did he even understand
what the antidote
would be at the time?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
He was a very hard
core just scientist,
so he had no patients.
>>REGINA: He didn't work
in collusion with any--
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: No, I
don't I don't think he did.
And I don't think
he really-- as far
as treatments that he proposed
were mostly preventative, which
was stay away from
carcinogens, which is obvious,
and maintain the respiratory
apparatus of the cell, which
he said mostly through B
vitamins and things like that.
But his contribution was
just purely scientific.
And he, in the beginning
of the 20th century,
because of the force
of his reputation--
he was widely regarded as the
world's foremost biochemist--
his theory carried
a lot of weight.
But then as the century
wore on, it became--
>>REGINA: He was marginalized.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Well, his
theory was marginalized.
The rest of his
contribution was celebrated.
But people sort of
snickered in the corner
about his crazy kind of
crackpot theory of cancer.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That was a shame.
It took a long time to recover
that and get to the point
where there are right now.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: And there
are some other reasons
for that have come up.
My research for the
book, Otto Warburg
stayed in Germany
during the war and so
many people didn't like that.
They thought he
should have fled.
And he was Hitler's oncologist.
So many believe there was sort
of this conspiratorial, almost
systematic effort
to discredit him.
It could have been conscious,
could have been subconscious,
but that was a feeling a
lot of scientists around--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So it was more
political in nature.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
>>REGINA: OK.
All right.
So now we come to Harold Varmus.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah, right.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's talk about
his contribution.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: OK.
So Harold Varmus and
Michael Bishop, they really
did the experiments that proved
the somatic mutation theory.
I shouldn't say proved,
but it looked like--
>>REGINA: It looked
like it proved.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
And what they did
was they experimented
with the Rous sarcoma
virus, which has four genes.
And at that time,
they knew-- this
was 1974-- they knew that
viruses inserted their genomes
into the DNA of normal cells.
And so their question is, how
is that virus transforming
a normal cell into
a cancerous cell?
And they isolate it down
to a single gene, right.
It was one of those single
genes that was doing
the cancer causing ability.
And then they
looked at that gene
and realized it was
just a distorted
version of a gene we already
had that's responsible--
>>REGINA: This is
critical, right?
This was a critical discovery.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And it looked like that
gene was responsible
for a kinase enzyme, it's
a communication protein.
So when it goes awry, it
shouts the instructions
for the cell to
divide over and over
and over because it's
distorted by a few mutations.
And so all of a
sudden, it's like,
now this makes all the
sense in the world.
Carcinogens come in
and they damage DNA
and they distort the DNA
to produce protein products
that mess with the cell cycle,
just like the Rous sarcoma
virus is doing on its own.
So all of a sudden,
Rous' virus was
subverted into the
somatic mutation theory.
And nobody saw that coming.
Rous himself was
like, I can't believe
nature's deck of trick cards.
>>REGINA: Yeah, because
it's part of us.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And so then it was
off and running,
and nobody really-- they won
the Nobel Prize, nobody really
looked back at that point.
Everybody was just convinced.
And you really look at
the history at the time,
DNA was discovered in '55,
so all eyes turn to DNA.
It was such a compelling
and pervasive moment
in molecular biology,
this understanding of what
the thread of life does
and the fact that it's
connected to cancer.
You could see how everybody was
just so taken by this theory.
>>REGINA: And understandably.
OK.
So now, before we rush into the
origins of chemotherapy-- which
is just a messy,
fascinating story
itself-- is there anything
else by way of the buildup
that we haven't
touched on in terms
of the discoveries
of various players
to kind of get us to this point?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Those
are the big three.
>>REGINA: Those
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Those are the big three
competing theories
and you did a good
job of summarizing it.
>>REGINA: OK.
So now let's talk
about mustard gas.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
Yeah, pleasant.
The advent of chemotherapy
was an accident
during World War II.
It was in Italy and the Germans
bombed-- what had happened
was the Allies and the Axis
were stockpiling mustard gas.
There was a war
treaty to not do it,
but each side was doing
it because they suspected
the other side was doing it.
>>REGINA: So that's covert.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Sure.
Right.
So we had a ship with I can't
remember the exact number,
but it was an unreal amount
of mustard gas inside of it.
The Germans bombed the
harbor, the Italian harbor
where our Navy was.
They bombed that ship and
it spilled into the harbor
at the same time all these
sailors were jumping in.
>>REGINA: Gooey, icky.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Thousands of sailors--
>>REGINA: Garlicky-smelling.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Terrible stuff.
They jumped in and were
covered in mustard gas.
And so it was a horrific scene--
>>REGINA: But they didn't know
it because this didn't exist.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
Nobody knew this, just
the very high command.
So they all come out and
they're burning and blistering
and no one knew
what was going on.
So the high command ordered
a doctor from the States
to fly over and treat them.
And he immediately
suspected mustard gas
and started treating
them for mustard gas.
And during the
aftermath of this,
they brought back samples to
the United States to Yale,
and what they noticed
in the samples
was a depletion
of lymphoid cells.
So somehow, the mustard
gas was depleting
the human body of lymphoid,
the immune system cells.
And so at that time,
during the early '40s,
there was only two treatments
for cancer, surgery
and radiation.
And so the dream scenario
was this chemotherapy,
something you could inject that
would go system-wide and find
cancer wherever it was.
So these two doctors had
this crazy idea-- well,
maybe it was crazy, maybe it
wasn't-- to inject mustard gas
as a chemotherapy agent.
And so that's how it started.
And you'd inject
patients with it
and you'd get these kind
of flickering remissions
and then the cancer would
typically come back.
And then as the
century progressed,
we'd find new and new agents
that did the same thing.
And all we knew of cancer
at that time was it
was a proliferation of cells.
So we attacked it
that way, with toxins
that stopped cell growth.
>>REGINA: With
horrific side effects.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Horrible
side effects, yeah.
And these guys were
doing the best they could
with a fatal
disease, at that time
these diseases were terminally
fatal, with what they had.
But they pushed harder
and harder and harder
and that's the--
and we still know--
that's what we equate today
with the side effects of-- it's
sad that those are
still in use today.
>>REGINA: It is.
It seems primitive.
But what I like
about your book is
that it's very generous
in honoring what was
known and possible in the day.
Now, there are a few people who
maybe didn't have the highest
motives along the way in
terms of trying to suppress
real data, but for
the most part these
were people that
were just trying
to find any solution
to something that
seemed impossible in the day.
So let's talk about the
experiments that ultimately
were undertaken
with children, more
with systemic like
lymphoma disease.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
So really two of the
godfathers of this combination
of chemotherapy, they're
called Frei and Freireich.
>>REGINA: I thought that
was the weirdest thing.
They had the same name.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah, Emil.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Emil Frei and Emil Freireich.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
It was perfect
because they were--
>>REGINA: I thought
it was a typo when
I was reading your book.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: And they
were perfect for each other
because one was bold
and he would do anything
to try to cure these kids
with the fatal leukemia
and the other one was cautious
and would pull the other one
back when he pushed too far.
So they were--
but even with them
together, everybody else
viewed them as crazy.
Yeah, they were
kind of marginalized
and these guys were
dripping poisons into kids.
And so you put
yourself in their shoes
and these kids are all
dying and were they good
or were they not good?
But they were bold
enough to try.
>>REGINA: Well, and the
parents were probably
bold enough to say, do anything,
my child's almost dead anyway.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
So they pushed and
they pushed and that's
what we know as combinational
chemotherapy, the idea
that you can stack
drugs and kind of reduce
the toxicity of each
one individually
if you combine them.
And then you can
add more to the mix.
And when the dust
settled, they did
cure these kids of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, ALL.
And in the majority
of the cases,
they went on to cure
Hodgkin's disease after that.
>>REGINA: Did some of
the patients survive it?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
The kids did.
>>REGINA: And went on to live.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Many of them have neurological
problems and it's not--
>>REGINA: The side
effect issues.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right,
the side effects from them.
But many went on to
live normal life spans.
>>REGINA: So now
this was promising.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And that was the
dogma of the time
was, OK, let's see
how far we can go now
with these combinations
of chemotherapies.
And I think
everybody would agree
that they went too far with it
because they started killing
patients trying to kill
the harder cancers that
didn't respond as well.
And some of the top people
like James Watson at the time,
he said the--
>>REGINA: DNA of
Crick and Watson.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
I think his quote was, the first
act of our tenure with cancer
is going to be so horrific
no one is going to want
to be around for the finale.
So they finally
had to kind of reel
back the effort at that point.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about Dr.
Pinkel and dosing the brain
with radiation.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Pinkel did what's
called total therapy,
and he was in that
aspect where they were
pushing really, really hard.
And when these kids
came back, what
would happen was the cancer
cells would find sort
of an asylum in the
cerebral spinal fluid
and then if you didn't
get it out of there,
then it would erupt
back in the brain.
So the kids were in remission,
they'd come back months later
with cancer in the brain.
And so he decided
to do a regimen
called total therapy, where he
added radiation into the mix
and extended chemotherapy
out even longer and longer.
And again, there were terrible
side effects and collateral
damage, but he was able to
cure a significant portion
of the kids with
that total therapy.
>>REGINA: Now, in the
medical community at large,
how is this perceived?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Again,
these guys at that time
were marginalized,
they were called names.
I can't remember exactly
the names they were called.
They had a sort of
acronym for them.
But you'd walk by
these words at the NCI,
the chemotherapy wards,
and these kids are bald
and throwing up, the kind of
horrific scene, and these guys
are walking around dripping
this mustard gas, essentially,
into their veins.
But at the same
time, at the end what
was an invariable fatal disease,
they were getting cured.
So it was this
push-pull between--
>>REGINA: So what the
turning point-- OK,
maybe this takes us to
Nixon's war on drugs.
What was the turning point that
made those two methodologies
mainstream, acceptable?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
So Nixon, when he declared war
on cancer in '71, that was when
we--
>>REGINA: War on
cancer-- did I say drugs?
Yeah, I think so.
That was Nancy Reagan.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
Declare war on something,
you can guarantee it's going
to last forever and not work.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: So yeah, he
declared war on cancer in '71.
And that was right after we
had these amazing successes
with the kids lymphoma and
leukemias and Hodgkin's disease
and testicular cancer.
>>REGINA: It was extending
life at any cost.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
So this bold era of hey, let's
keep this going, the momentum
going, we thought
there'd be a general cure
within five years there was
so much momentum with cancer
therapy.
And that's when we really pushed
into trying to cure the harder
cancers and we went too far.
And it is sad that those are the
mainline therapies still today.
And they work for a
handful of cancers.
Standard care works fantastic
for testicular cancer,
some of the leukemias.
But we use it as an adjunctive
therapy for many cancers.
And I was at a
conference recently
and there was a study that came
out that all added up together,
as an adjunctive therapy,
chemotherapy confers about 2.9%
increase in survival.
So for all of that cost of
illness and losing hair,
is it worth a 2.9%
increase in survival?
I really doubt it.
So many doctors are
rethinking using it
as an adjunctive
therapy in many cases.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, talk about Pete
Pedersen, his contribution
and the role of ATP,
lactic acid, and so forth.
And then we'll get
to Young Hee Ko.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
Yeah, Young Ko.
>>REGINA: Wow, what a hero.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
Yeah, she's fantastic.
All right.
So Pete Pedersen, he's-- in
writing the book that was one
of the most fun things
was getting to know Pete.
And so his lab at Johns Hopkins
took up where Warburg left off.
>>REGINA: What inspired him to
pick up the metabolic theory
again?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Well,
it was interesting
because his mentor was
named Albert Lehninger, who
discovered mitochondria.
And so that lineage of
the Warburg biochemists
was right there with Pete.
And so he sort of took up
looking at the mitochondria
and cancer, he was always
interested in cancer.
And so he noticed right
away how damaged and defunct
mitochondria were
in cancer cells.
And so he sort of started
proving a lot of the stuff
that Warburg only
suspected in his lab.
And a tremendous amount
of incredible research
came out of his lab, the
discovery of hexokinase-2,
which is this important
enzyme in the cancer cell
that's responsible for
the Warburg effect,
they discovered its
importance in the cancer cell.
And then Young
came into the lab.
>>REGINA: Set us up for who
she is and what she was like.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: OK.
Yeah.
So Young, she's a very,
very interesting woman.
She came into Pete's lab
and Pete was known for--
>>REGINA: How long ago was this?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: OK,
this was I want to say
the late '80s, early '90s.
And Pete was known for this
gritty Oklahoma work ethic.
He literally hadn't missed a
day of work in, like, 25 years.
And so Young came into his
lab and she outworked Pete.
She was literally in the
lab-- she slept there.
>>REGINA: She was obsessed.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
She was obsessed
and she worked 18 hours,
would sleep a little bit.
And she told me a story,
she'd look down at her feet
after a couple of
months and realize
her shoes were
completely worn out
and hadn't even noticed
that until then.
So in this lab,
they were just so
focused on the
metabolism of cancer
and trying to
solve this problem.
And Young's contribution was
they knew about the Warburg
effect and so they wanted
to target hexokinase-2,
which to them was the
driving force of cancer,
the beating heart of
cancer was this one enzyme.
And they're trying to figure
out how to get to that enzyme.
And so Young in her mind,
she kept circling back, OK,
what's going on?
The cancer cell is
overproducing lactic acid
and lactic acid has to be
released from the cancer cell
or it'll kill itself.
It's like an idling
car in a parked garage,
you've got to open the door.
So the cancer cells
have these little doors
called monocarboxylic
acid transport proteins,
and through those little pores
lactic acid is able to leave.
And so that's the
functional difference
between a normal cell
and a cancer cell.
A cancer cell will
have all these spores,
where normal cells don't
have very many of them.
And so in her mind, she
thought about this molecule
she worked with
in Washington that
looks just like lactic acid
but it's very reactive.
And so she started testing it,
it's called 3-Bromopyruvate.
And she started testing it on
cell lines, just Petri dishes,
and found out that it
was just incredibly
active against cancer cells.
She compared it to all the
traditional chemotherapeutic
agents and it was by
far and away the best--
>>REGINA: Against
all kinds of cancer.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And that's the beautiful
thing about this theory
is this metabolic defect
is in every cancer cell.
>>REGINA: Doesn't
matter what kind.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: When
you look at a PET scan,
that's what you're looking at.
You're looking at
this metabolic defect.
The cancer cell is
voraciously sucking in sugar
and converting it
to lactic acid.
In a PET scan it's
just labeled glucose.
So you're seeing this effect.
And 95% of cancers
are PET positive,
the remaining 5% are probably
just growing extremely slow
or not growing at all.
So the 3-Bromopyruvate,
she tested it over and over
and noticed how
tremendous it was.
And they through went
through this series
of pre-clinical data
with mice and rabbits
and it looked outstanding.
I mean the pre-clinical march
was like this could be the best
care chemotherapy drug ever.
>>REGINA: It was so exciting
reading that part of your book.
And then what?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah, right.
And then it became embroiled
in a multi-year just dust-up
lawsuit and tragically
got sidelined
for a long period of time.
But now it's getting back on
its feet and back on track.
>>REGINA: Well, let's talk
about what she did with it.
I mean she was able to use it
at least on a human or two.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
So the one case study was a
young man in the Netherlands,
[? Javar, ?] a
16-year-old kid diagnosed
with hepatocellular carcinoma.
And 95% of his liver was
taken over by tumors.
And so Young got the call by
his father, who was desperate,
had tried other things
and was doing everything
he could just searching
the internet at night
to find anything for his son.
And he stumbled
across 3-Bromopyruvate
so he called Young and
said, can you help my son?
And she's the kind of person
that will help anybody.
She'll stop what she's doing,
no matter what, and try to help.
So she emailed doctors to see
if they would administrate it
and none in America would.
>>REGINA: This was what
was so fascinating.
They wouldn't--
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And this--
>>REGINA: --administrate it.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: And this is
the crux of the problem today
is doctors are so
scared to deviate
from standard of care
for litigious reasons,
they can get sued.
But at the same time,
when you have something
like [? Javar, ?]
or glioblastoma,
you have a terminal sentence.
So the Hippocratic
oath is to do whatever
you can for your patient--
>>REGINA: But they wouldn't.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And now we know
that combining stuff
is the only way we're
going to do this,
single agents do not work.
We learned this from AIDS.
When you combine drugs, the
energies are tremendous.
But you can't get
doctors to do it.
You can get some to do it,
but the majority won't.
So they found this one
doctor in Germany, Dr. Vogel,
who was willing to do it.
And he administered it I
think 10 doses over a month
and brought [? Javar ?]
back to where
there was an undetectable
amount of cancer in his body.
>>REGINA: And this
was 95% of his liver
had been ravaged like by cancer.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
He was in such bad shape
when Young got there--
>>REGINA: Bloated and yellow
and all but unconscious.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah,
just hanging by a thread.
And they literally
brought him back
to where he was able
to travel to the States
and speak at Johns Hopkins.
And he died while traveling
because he caught pneumonia.
And when I was interviewing
Young about this,
she teared up
because they were so
excited he was feeling better
and his family was like,
let's go travel.
And in retrospect, he
was sick, his liver
wasn't functioning well.
He just needed time to recover.
>>REGINA: And with that therapy,
the liver could have recovered.
It was in the process
of recovering.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
Yeah, he was a young man.
He had recuperative powers.
>>REGINA: And she had so many
obstacles thrown in her way.
As I remember, it was
a year between the time
she was contacted and actually
got the injection underway,
which how he hung on
that long is amazing.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And they just tried to buy
him time during that time
while it was going
through the committees
to get approval to use.
So the doctor was injecting
traditional chemotherapy,
knowing it was probably not
going to do anything at all
but just trying to buy him
time to get him to where
he could get this drug, 3BP.
>>REGINA: And for her it's been
a tough road and a sad story
in a lot of ways, in that
she's obviously brilliant
and she was recognized for that.
But then when she'd go apply
for grants it was like, well,
you can't get a grant
if you don't have a lab
and if you don't have a lab, you
can't get a grant, and so on.
And she got caught up in
this just horrific storm
of protocol.
I mean kind more of she was
caught in legal situations.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Lots of legal-- right.
And the infighting
at Johns Hopkins,
I don't-- I heard Young's side
of this whole story and so I
don't like to comment
on the other side's.
But that's all we
need to know is
there was in-fighting
there, some perceived
injustices on both sides.
>>REGINA: What had happened
to her and her work, then?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
So she left Johns Hopkins.
And she still had
patents on 3BP.
So after Johns
Hopkins, she's tried
to get 3BP developed, which
has been its own sort of series
of problems along the way.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, I'm glad to hear-- we
already heard that footnote
that it's making a resurgence.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: It is.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
She's making progress.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
Now let's talk about
dark material theory
because it seems to me this
is really where the story--
it becomes more complex,
but it's where it also
starts making sense.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
So dark matter, that
was sort of a footnote
in a review on the Cancer Genome
Atlas project by a scientist
named Burt Vogelstein.
And what it was was
when he was looking
through the data from the
Cancer Genome Atlas Project,
what profoundly struck
him and everybody
was there are samples that
have very, very few driving
mutations.
You can find samples of one or
two driving mutations or none.
And there's also
pediatric tumors
with no driving mutations.
So the question is,
what's driving the cancer?
According to the
somatic mutation theory,
this just can't be.
So he proposed further
down in this journal
this idea of cancer's
version of dark matter,
which is there is some
presumptive force driving
cancer that we don't yet know.
And this, as I spoke to earlier,
is this sort of vortex or void
that allowed other researchers
to step in and propose
other models of cancer.
>>REGINA: And one of them
is that it's the field
itself, it's the medium
itself that begins causing,
and this can be
epigenetic in nature.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Exactly.
Right.
>>REGINA: So now
this is where we
start getting into the mind-body
emotional connections that
affect the matter, the blood.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
Very interesting.
When you look at-- so there's
another alternative theory
called the tissue
architecture theory.
And it's a very compelling
theory, as well,
where the default state of
any cell is cell division.
And what keeps a
cell in check, what
keeps it living in the
collective of the multicellular
organism, is the
tissue architecture.
So when your cells are in a
healthy tissue architecture,
they cooperate with
the collective, right?
Well, once that
architecture breaks down
through inflammation,
through carcinogens,
then you release those negative
controls from the tissue
architecture and cells are off
and racing towards neoplasm,
towards cancer.
So yeah, it's epigenetic, so
it's epigenetic in origin.
There's not
mutations to the DNA.
They are a side effect
of this process,
the genomic instability as
a side effect of cancer.
>>REGINA: Yes.
In Seyfried's book, Cancers
and Metabolic Disease,
there's that one quote you
put in there, mutations in DNA
arise as effects, rather than
as the cause, of tumor growth.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Right.
So Tom's model, the
metabolic theory,
is that damage to the
mitochondria happens first
and then the mitochondria
send an epigenetic signal
to the nucleus so a new shuffle
of genes gets expressed.
And one of those genes,
for example, is hexokinase.
And this cassette of genes now,
through epigenetic expression,
drives neoplastic growth.
>>REGINA: The damage to
the mitochondria initially
has to do with the
quality of the medium.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Sure.
This can all be tied together.
This is all being sorted out.
So the side effect of genomic
instability and the mutations
that happen, you can see how
they looked like the cause,
but in fact, according to
these theories, they're
a side effect.
>>REGINA: And that's
interesting because even when
you look at it--
it's still esoteric,
the notion of black
hole theory and what
some of the newer
physicists have
to say about it has
to do with the belief
that black holes are essentially
the source of information.
And so if you look
at dark matter
as producing it, giving the
impulse of certain information,
then that lends itself very well
to the notion of epigenetics.
Information comes-- there are
many inputs of information.
And again, it gets back
to, as you say, toxins
in the environment, belief
systems, familial belief
systems, toxic emotions.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
And measurable markers
like blood glucose
is very correlated to a
worse prognosis for cancer
or even a higher
rate of diagnosis.
And yeah, for sure, I mean any
type of mental or spiritual--
just being--
>>REGINA: These are just
factors that feed information
into the system.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
If you're healthy as a whole,
then your immune system
functions better and that's
all very provable, as well.
>>REGINA: That's all
provable, but nonetheless it
still gets down to
this one quality
in the cells themselves, right?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Sure.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
So now let's dive into
that because think
this is where the hope is,
it's where it gets interesting.
So we know that
healthy mitochondria
doesn't allow cancer to grow.
Now, we're getting down to the
ketones and the ketogenic diet,
how did this whole piece come
into the story of the glucose,
lactic acid, and so forth?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
OK.
So according to the metabolic
theory, the driving force
being cancer is mitochondrial
damage and this reversion
to anaerobic energy generation.
So Tom Seyfried, I
believe, was the first one
to propose-- not the first
one to utilize, but propose--
the ketogenic diet as
a therapy for cancer.
And the idea to
the ketogenic diet
is you shift away
from carbohydrates
to fat and moderate
protein and then
your body will start generating
these little molecules called
ketones to replace
circulating blood glucose.
And so ketones are
interesting in that they
have to be burned in
intact mitochondria.
They have to be
burned aerobically.
So it's a very elegant idea
because if you transition
into this metabolic state,
you're going to put tremendous
pressure on cancer cells
because you're taking away
their preferred fuel, glucose,
and putting a new fuel
in the mix that normal cells can
burn perfectly but cancer cells
cannot.
>>REGINA: It's so simple.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
It's so simple.
And that idea is beautiful
and people latch onto it
and it makes perfect sense.
But beyond that,
what's interesting now
is you can show
in a Petri dish--
a fabulous scientist
named Adrienne Scheck,
she's wonderful, has shown
that regardless of the glucose
concentration, ketone
bodies will slow
the growth of cancer cells.
So ketones by themselves
are extremely interesting
molecules.
And she's shown that they
do an incredible amount
of epigenetic rearrangement
within cancer cells.
>>REGINA: And can actually start
recovering the cells, right?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: They do.
What they do is they push
the genetic expression more
towards normal cells.
So they're pushing
cancer cells more
to act like healthy
normal cells.
At the same time,
they're potentiating
them to be more easily
killed by traditional routes.
>>REGINA: And the
die-off that happens,
this is another thing I
remember from the book,
rather than being just
like a bloodbath of chaos
with radiation is more of
a normal, natural pattern
of die-off, right?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: That's right.
Yeah.
And you can show that
inflammation markers
are greatly reduced in ketosis.
And one of the big
problems in brain cancer
is edema within the brain
because it's a closed cavity.
So edema is what
largely kills a lot
of people with glioblastomas.
There's just nowhere for
swelling and fluid to go.
The ketogenic diet
reduces the swelling
and the amount of fluid,
the edema, within the brain.
So the die-off from radiation,
they've shown this in trials,
there's much less side effects
from chemotherapy and radiation
when a person is in ketosis.
So it modulates normal cells
and cancer cells differently.
It makes normal cells
able to withstand insults
and makes cancer cells
more vulnerable to them.
>>REGINA: I mean, this
has so many implications.
This goes
hand-in-hand-- and we're
going to talk about Marianne and
her brain tumor in a moment--
but this goes hand-in-hand with
a calorically restricted diet,
or a starvation diet,
which has had expression
all over the place.
The HCG thing that
has been raging
for the last number of years,
especially about three or four
years ago, which was
essentially the introduction
of these particular
hormones with a starvation
ketogenic diet.
And people lost weight
very rapidly and kind of
reset the system.
But the other thing I think that
without going to the HCG thing,
people were starting to
see with paleo-- which
is kind of a softer version
of a ketogenic diet--
that inflammation goes away,
diabetes is being impacted,
all inflammatory chronic
diseases are impacted.
And this is all what
you're talking about.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
I was just at a
conference in Tampa
that was called
metabolic therapeutics.
And really the thrust
of the conference
was the ketogenic diet.
And the ketogenic has
got an amazing history
if you don't know.
It was first proposed
for epilepsy in the '20s.
It was standard of care.
It's remarkable.
And that's been known
back as far as--
>>REGINA: Something
about the glucose
in the cells was creating
the epileptic seizures
in the brain, or
how did that work?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
They still don't know.
>>REGINA: I see.
But when you remove
that glucose--
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
Right.
Is it the removal
of the glucose or is
it the addition of the ketones?
They still don't know how.
But when you put--
>>REGINA: It stops seizures.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
It's an incredibly effective
therapy for seizures.
And it was the standard
of care in the '20s,
but then drugs came
around in the '30s
and the diet got forgotten.
And then it was resurrected
by Jim Abrahams, the Hollywood
movie producer, whose son had
a horrible case of epilepsy
and went through drug
after drug after drug.
And this was made into a
movie, First Do No Harm.
And the ketogenic diet
is what cured him.
And so these kids that are
drug refractory or are not
responding to drugs,
I think 50% of them
will be cured by
the ketogenic diet.
And so it's been
known for some reason
this incredibly
effective almost free
dietary therapy just keeps
getting forgotten about.
But at this
conference in Tampa, I
mean we were there for
Alzheimer's, for Parkinson's,
for diabetes, for cancer now.
So it makes you think, if this
one dietary state of ketosis
is so effective, this
broad swath of pathologies,
what does that mean?
That means that as humans,
we've probably stepped really
far outside our
normal state of being
and that we are supposed
to enter ketosis
from time to time.
Whether it's supposed
to be sustained,
long periods of
time I don't know,
but it seems like
this periodically
entering it clearly seems like
it's got huge health benefits.
>>REGINA: You walk
through the grocery store,
including health food
stores-- doesn't matter--
you're going to see
a plethora of baked
and candies and other things to
chew on and suck on on the way
out the door that are
laden with sugars.
And there's never
a moment we have
to be hungry or without
something in our car or purse
or whatnot or some kind of
protein bar laden with sugar,
thinking we're doing a
good thing for ourselves,
when the body actually needs to
go into these periodic states
of hunger, mini-starvation.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
It's a renewal process.
When you do that, I mean all
kinds of fascinating things
happen.
You get mitochondrial
biogenesis,
so your mitochondrial
will renew themselves;
you get this incredible
process called autophagy, which
is the cells will
digest defunct proteins,
it's just like a house
cleaning type process.
And autophagy, when
it's mutated or not,
being effectively utilized
is associated with cancer.
So you stimulate it with
periodic fasting and things
like that--
>>REGINA: It eats up kind of
necrotic growth in the body.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And it can even eat up
whole damaged mitochondria
that's called mitophagy.
So we have these innate
built-in renewal processes.
>>REGINA: But we won't
let ourselves get hungry
and we throw a bunch of starches
and sugar into ourselves
and we're setting
ourselves up for all
of these chronic disease.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: And you
take the 300,000-foot view,
what happened?
OK, well, life was
tough a long time ago.
You scrapped for food and
life, we didn't live long.
>>REGINA: We all
shared the buffalo
for a long time, dried meat.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And then 10,000 years ago,
all of the sudden, agriculture
came along and wow, we
had cheap carbohydrates.
The population exploded.
But now we're kind
of rethinking, well,
that was great to get a lot
of people on the planet,
but it's probably not the
best way to live your life,
to have a health span, to
live well for a long lifespan.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK.
So let's talk quickly about
Marianne and the tumor
and how she was worked with.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: So Marianne,
she was the first case study
that Tom Seyfried worked on.
And she had a
glioblastoma which was not
able to be fully
respected surgically,
which is usually the
case with glioblastomas
because they grow tentacles.
And her doctor and Tom
Seyfried did the ketogenic diet
alongside the standard of care.
She did a really restricted
version, very few calories.
>>REGINA: 600 I
think you said a day.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON:
Right, very low.
And what was
remarkable about her
was they were able to get a
complete remission in a very,
very short period of
time that's not-- I
mean you don't see
that very often at all.
And so they couldn't
find any active cancer
cells in her brain right away.
And she maintained
that for a long time
until she got off the diet.
And she quit the diet--
>>REGINA: Well, 600
calories a day, mostly fat,
means you get a few
tablespoons of fat,
a little bit of protein.
She felt she was
starving and weak.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
And I don't know what
happened, if they could
have brought her back to more--
>>REGINA: That's
what I was wondering.
Why didn't they put her
on a 1,200 calorie a day
ketogenic diet?
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: I don't know.
I don't know why that was.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
When I was reading the
book, I was wondering that.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
So she went off it
completely and then tried
Avastin, which is a
very controversial drug
for glioblastoma.
>>REGINA: So she did
ultimately-- she was tired.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: She was done fighting.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: That's right.
>>REGINA: Now, along with
other information that
has been suppressed
throughout time--
we have the work done by Royal
Raymond Rife when, in the '30s,
the headlines were, the cure
for cancer has arrived, right?
And then he was systematically
destroyed and his technology.
And other things that
influence the cell more
from an electrical
point of view,
because that's another
component, right?
All of those were killed,
whether it was color therapy
or what, those were all killed.
Little by little, I
think these things
are making a comeback,
more in underground circles
than anything.
But what you're
talking about here
is something that's
so accessible
and anyone can do as a
preventative measure.
But again, now you get into
some theoretical issues.
I was a vegetarian for 20 years
for kind of spiritual reasons
and very committed to
it, wrote books on it,
did television shows on it, and
then I started getting sick.
And other people have been
through their versions
of this journey.
Now, what about the cancer
institutes around the world--
and I've interviewed
a couple of people
that are affiliated with
the well-known ones-- that
are having people
come in and then
they put them on massive
amounts of juice,
for example, which is
laden with glucose.
Some of it does
work to an extent.
Talk about that for a
minute, because this
is a lot of conflict
for people to take in.
Should I be a vegan, paleo?
I mean goodness, you know.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
There's a lot.
And this type of diet, this
medical ketogenic diet,
is a very measurable
medical intervention.
So we're not talking
about anything
beyond just general
health or anything,
but just for cancer we're going
down this road of proving it
preclinically.
And there's a tremendous
amount of data
that's reproducible that
shows it works incredibly well
preclinically.
Will it cure cancers?
It may in some cases,
probably not in all.
But it's most effective use, it
slows the growth of tumor cells
and it looks like it will
potentiate other treatments.
So it will be one
piece of a puzzle
and it allows for
treatments to work better
with less damage, less
side effects, and so forth.
And so this is preclinically.
Now, there are clinical
trials going on
and Dr. Scheck is one of
them doing them in Arizona
at the Barrow Institute.
It's a trial for
high grade gliomas
alongside standard of care.
So it should be very clear
from the data it'll measure
survival, overall survival.
So I think once
we have that data,
it's going to be really
easy from that point
because now information is
disseminated so quickly,
the internet.
And people, they're
fighting for their lives,
they search things out--
most of them do, not all.
So it will be there and doctors
can't ignore it at that point.
It will be a documented
clinical study.
And then it's up to
them if they want
to put Jell-O in front
of their-- at some point,
that those that standard of
care idea will be marginalized.
And the idea is that
you've got to keep weight
on cancer patients, they
can get cachexia, which is--
>>REGINA: No, need
to be starved.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
Well, to a certain degree.
>>REGINA: I'm not
saying starve to death.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: I
would say to patients
to just declare it's
always best to do
that with a willing provider.
Because there's other
confounding factors
when you're sick with cancer
and you want to do it medically.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And that's where things like
bone broths and all this
have started coming into
the picture, as well.
Because that was used in
a very prominent case also
as the beginning
of the reversal.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So I mean there are
a lot of ways to turn on this.
And so what you're saying in
the book at the end is it says,
the future of cancer
may look something
like a ketogenic diet
combined with 3BP,
the bromopyruvate you
were talking about
and Young Ko's work,
and perhaps something
like hyperbaric oxygen therapy.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
It so clear in my
mind that the way
this is going to
solve this problem
is by combinations of therapies.
And I think there's
no disagreement
in that from anybody, that
there's no magic bullet.
And a lot of these protocols
are synergistic with each other,
they operate through
overlapping pathways.
And there's many cases of
people doing stuff, combining
many therapies, and achieving
outstanding outcomes.
And doctors know this.
And there's many drugs that
have low toxicity that have
anti-cancer abilities that are
off label that to get those
into trials in combination
is brutally difficult.
But to somebody with
a terminal sentence--
>>REGINA: Go off script.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
So that's what I
think it's going
to look-- I mean with
a ketogenic diet,
hyperbaric oxygen, a
synergistic with it,
3BP could come in as
a tumoricidal agent
and mop up in a
very low toxic way.
And when I talk to Young Ko
and all the others involved,
they all think that
it's going to be
this combination of therapies
that's going to really make
a difference.
>>REGINA: Totally
logical, makes sense.
I think maybe one of
the biggest issues
as much as the average
person is afraid of cancer,
the average doctor is
afraid of litigation.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And until
that barrier can somehow
be broken down,
till there can be
some kind of grace
or permission, that
seems the biggest
challenge at the moment.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Right.
>>REGINA: But still,
we can take control
on a preventative level.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: That's right.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: It's up to us.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
That's what Tom Seyfried, that's
a beautiful part of his book
is you can theoretically
ketogenic diet periodically
or intermittent fasting
or just good nutrition.
I interviewed Dr. Ames,
who talks about when you're
short of certain
nutrients, your body
rations them to
short-term survival
at the expense of enzymes that
repair DNA or keep mitochondria
healthy.
So good nutrition, periodic
fasting, all these things
are definitely preventive.
>>REGINA: Even proper
supplementation,
mineralization, all these
things done correctly,
enzyme therapies-- all of them.
All of these play a role in it.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Well, thank you.
Thank you for your book and
thank you for your time.
I'm so glad Sandy hooked us up.
Wonderful.
>>CHRISTOFFERSON: Thank you.
>>REGINA: This book made
me feel that we're really
on the verge of turning cancer
into preventable and reversible
disease without damaging
our overall health.
Very exciting.
This would remove a major source
of fear from the human species,
as well.
Meanwhile, I can't
recommend the book
enough to anyone that wants
to understand cancer better.
"Tripping Over the Truth,"
available at major booksellers.
Until next time, thank you
for joining us here at Gaia.
[THEME MUSIC]